How to make your profile if you are not from Tier 1 Engineering college or a college which doesn't provide an opportunity you wish to have. This blog will be helpful for CSE or related branch. The content is based on my experience and perspective. This blog can be a guide to engineering college students.
After getting a lot of request on Quora, Facebook and Linkedin from students I decided to write on this topic.

A brief intro about me: I am an Undergraduate in IT from Kalyani Government Engineering College. I have interned at DRDO and CIL and few startups and also worked as a freelance developer. The first internship I got was in 3rd semester in a Kolkata based startup. I landed in my college and was really depressed for 7–8 months as I prepared in Kota for IIT JEE. It was my dream to be in IIT’s but God had a different plan for me :) I am still on my way to achieve my dreams. I have written this blog to increase awareness among students of the engineering college which really offers very few opportunities. I wish if someone would have guided me in my first year, but if you have nobody to guide you learn more and today I am grateful for this!
Read the content ahead only if:
You are passionate and want to make your standard above average after graduation.
You believe in working hard rather than finding an excuse.
You have the guts and patience to fail and start again.
You want to prove that you are no less than a Tier 1 institute students.
How to start?
Things that you are not told by anyone:
Be patient, don't give up easily. If you are not from a well-known college good things take time to come :)
Build a skill called “NEVER GIVE UP” attitude.
College life is all about exploring and finding out what you love! Try to explore each and every domain till 2nd year and try to get perfect in a particular domain in 3rd year so that after third year you can land in a decent internship. Try to explore what you love not what others are doing! This is the most common mistake we tend to make. We see our seniors or batchmates excelling in something and we blindly start following them. Please don't do that.
1st Semester
My suggestion will be to start with a programming language(C/C++, Java, Python) in 1st Semester. Try to explore what you are interested in. Join clubs of your college. Explore the opportunities in and around the college. Take a break as you might have worked hard for the entrance exam.
2nd Semester
Take a course on Data Structures and algorithmPractice questions on Codechef, SPOJ, and Geeksforgeeks. Participate in Competitive coding contests held on Codechef. Initially, it will be difficult to understand and code. It was very difficult for me as well but try to solve your doubts by discussing with your friends. search for your doubts on Youtube channel and Google :)
3rd Semester — 4th Semester
Try exploring development(Website Development and Android Application Development)
Choose whatever you like.
Some of the courses that I would recommend is by Coursera, Udacity and Youtube channel (Freecodecamp is the best for Web Development, MTech Viral By Pawan Kumar). Feel free to choose any course according to your convenience. Most of the stuff online is awesome and you will not regret going through it. Make cool projects and share on Github.
By the end of these courses, you will have some awesome projects on your Resume and Skills Like Java, Android, Front-end, Back-end, etc.
I will also recommend you to join your college website team and contribute to the college website of college fest website.
In the semester break you have two choices:
Apply for GSOC: This will be the best decision ever. Try to get accepted in GSoC.If you fail in it no worries learn from your mistake and move ahead. Apply next year.
Apply for internship: Apply for internships on Internshala or other platforms. Internshala has made getting internships very easy.
Don't forget to keep practicing coding(Data Structures and Algorithm).
5th -6th Semester
Explore Machine Learning, Data Science, Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, etc. You can also continue with Development if you fell in love with it in 2nd year but I will suggest you to once explore these fields as well. Make awesome projects. share on Github. The advantage of Machine Learning and Data Science is that you can get Research internship opportunities at DRDO, ISRO, IIS, other IITs and even foreign Research Internships :)
After this semester getting internship will be higher as you have explored so many fields, You must be having cool projects to share and even internship that you did after 2nd year.
In the semester break you have two choices:
Apply for GSOC: This will be the best decision ever. Try to get accepted in GSoC.If you fail in it no worries learn from your mistake and move ahead. Apply next year.
Apply for internship: Apply for internships on Internshala or other platforms. Internshala has made getting internships very easy. Apply for Research internship opportunities at DRDO, ISRO, IIS, other IITs and even foreign Research Internships. I have written about how to apply for DRDO and ISRO on medium, Check that.
Don’t forget to keep practicing coding(Data Structures and Algorithm).
Final year is a vast topic, I will write about it once I complete my graduation since I am still exploring about Final Year. There are people who inspire me a lot. Akshay Saini is one of them (He is a Web Engineer at Uber, He makes awesome content that can be useful for college students Link: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC3N9i_KvKZYP4F84FPIzgPQ )
Last but not the least stay motivated, Don't Give up, Keep exploring. Good things take time to come so Be patient!
